Canada has always been a trading nation and commerce remains the engine of economic growth. As
Canadians, we could not maintain our standard of living without engaging in trade with other nations.
In 1988, Canada enacted free trade with the United States. Mexico became a partner in 1994 in the
broader North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), with over 444 million people and over $1 trillion
in merchandise trade in 2008. 
Today, Canada has one of the ten largest economies in the world and is part of the G8 group of leading
industrialized countries with the United States, Germany, the United Kingdom, Italy, France, Japan and
Russia. 
Service industries provide thousands of
different jobs in areas like transportation,
education, health care, construction,
banking, communications, retail services,
tourism and government. More than 75% of
working Canadians now have jobs in service
industries. 
Manufacturing industries make products
to sell in Canada and around the world.
Manufactured products include paper,
high technology equipment, aerospace
technology, automobiles, machinery, food,
clothing and many other goods. Our largest
international trading partner is the United
States. 
Natural resources industries include forestry,
fishing, agriculture, mining and energy. These
industries have played an important part in
the country’s history and development. Today,
the economy of many areas of the country still
depends on developing natural resources,
and a large percentage of Canada’s exports
are natural resources commodities. 
Canada enjoys close relations with the United
States and each is the other’s largest trading
partner. Over three-quarters of Canadian exports
are destined for the U.S.A. In fact we have the
biggest bilateral trading relationship in the world.
Integrated Canada-U.S.A. supply chains compete
with the rest of the world. Canada exports billions
of dollars worth of energy products, industrial
goods, machinery, equipment, automotive,
agricultural, fishing and forestry products,
and consumer goods every year. Millions of
Canadians and Americans cross every year and in
safety what is traditionally known as “the world’s
longest undefended border.”
At Blaine in the State of Washington, the Peace
Arch, inscribed with the words “children of
a common mother” and “brethren dwelling
together in unity,” symbolizes our close ties and
common interests. 
Course content directly sourced from Discover Canada - The Rights and Responsibilities of Citizenship
Found at: https://www.canada.ca/en/immigration-refugees-citizenship/corporate/publications-manuals/discover-canada.html
##
Canada includes many different geographical
areas and five distinct regions.
The Atlantic Provinces, 
Central Canada, 
The Prairie Provinces, 
The West Coast, and 
The Northern Territories.
The National Capital 

Ottawa, located on the Ottawa River, was chosen
as the capital in 1857 by Queen Victoria, the
great-great-grandmother of Queen Elizabeth II.
Today it is Canada’s fourth largest metropolitan
area. The National Capital Region, 4,700 square
kilometres surrounding Ottawa, preserves and
enhances the area’s built heritage and natural
environment. 

Canada has ten provinces and three territories.
Each province and territory has its own capital
city. You should know the capital of your province
or territory as well as that of Canada. 

Canada has a population of about 34 million
people. While the majority live in cities,
Canadians also live in small towns, rural areas
and everywhere in between. 
Newfoundland and Labrador is the most easterly point in North America and has its own time zone. In
addition to its natural beauty, the province has a unique heritage linked to the sea. The oldest colony of
the British Empire and a strategic prize in Canada’s early history, the province has long been known for its
fisheries, coastal fishing villages and distinct culture. Today off-shore oil and gas extraction contributes a
substantial part of the economy. Labrador also has immense hydro-electric resources. 

Prince Edward Island (P.E.I.) is the smallest province, known for its beaches, red soil and agriculture,
especially potatoes. P.E.I. is the birthplace of Confederation, connected to mainland Canada by one of
the longest continuous multispan bridges in the world, the Confederation Bridge. Anne of Green Gables,
set in P.E.I. by Lucy Maud Montgomery, is a much-loved story about the adventures of a little red-headed
orphan girl. 
 
Nova Scotia is the most populous Atlantic Province, with a rich history as the gateway to Canada. Known
for the world’s highest tides in the Bay of Fundy, the province’s identity is linked to shipbuilding, fisheries
and shipping. As Canada’s largest east coast port, deep-water and ice-free, the capital, Halifax, has
played an important role in Atlantic trade and defence and is home to Canada’s largest naval base. Nova
Scotia has a long history of coal mining, forestry and agriculture. Today there is also off-shore oil and gas
exploration. The province’s Celtic and Gaelic traditions sustain a vibrant culture. Nova Scotia is home to
over 700 annual festivals, including the spectacular military tattoo in Halifax. 

Situated in the Appalachian Range, the province was founded by the United Empire Loyalists and has
the second largest river system on North America’s Atlantic coastline, the St. John River system. Forestry,
agriculture, fisheries, mining, food processing and tourism are the principal industries. Saint John is
the largest city, port and manufacturing centre; Moncton is the principal Francophone Acadian centre;
and Fredericton, the historic capital. New Brunswick is the only officially bilingual province, and about
one-third of the population lives and works in French. The province’s pioneer Loyalist and French cultural
heritage and history come alive in street festivals and traditional music. 

Nearly eight million people live in Quebec, the vast majority along or near the St. Lawrence River. More
than three-quarters speak French as their first language. The resources of the Canadian Shield have helped
Quebec to develop important industries, including forestry, energy and mining. Quebec is Canada’s main
producer of pulp and paper. The province’s huge supply of fresh water has made it Canada’s largest
producer of hydro-electricity. Quebecers are leaders in cutting-edge industries such as pharmaceuticals
and aeronautics. Quebec films, music, literary works and food have international stature, especially in
La Francophonie, an association of French-speaking nations. Montreal, Canada’s second largest city and
the second largest mainly French-speaking city in the world after Paris, is famous for its cultural diversity. 

At more than 12 million, the people of Ontario make up more than one-third of Canadians. The large
and culturally diverse population, natural resources and strategic location contribute to a vital economy.
Toronto is the largest city in Canada and the country’s main financial centre. Many people work in the
service or manufacturing industries, which produce a large percentage of Canada’s exports. The Niagara
region is known for its vineyards, wines and fruit crops. Ontario farmers raise dairy and beef cattle, poultry,
and vegetable and grain crops. Founded by United Empire Loyalists, Ontario also has the largest Frenchspeaking 
population outside of Quebec, with a proud history of preserving their language and culture.
There are five Great Lakes located between Ontario and the United States: Lake Ontario, Lake Erie, Lake
Huron, Lake Michigan (in the U.S.A.) and Lake Superior, the largest freshwater lake in the world. 

Manitoba’s economy is based on agriculture, mining and hydro-electric power generation. The province’s
most populous city is Winnipeg, whose Exchange District includes the most famous street intersection
in Canada, Portage and Main. Winnipeg’s French Quarter, St. Boniface, has Western Canada’s largest
Francophone community at 45,000. Manitoba is also an important centre of Ukrainian culture, with 14%
reporting Ukrainian origins, and the largest Aboriginal population of any province, at over 15%. 

Saskatchewan, once known as the “breadbasket of the world” and the “wheat province,” has 40% of
the arable land in Canada and is the country’s largest producer of grains and oilseeds. It also boasts
the world’s richest deposits of uranium and potash, used in fertilizer, and produces oil and natural gas.
Regina, the capital, is home to the training academy of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Saskatoon,
the largest city, is the headquarters of the mining industry and an important educational, research and
technology centre. 

Alberta is the most populous Prairie province. The province, and the world-famous Lake Louise in the
Rocky Mountains, were both named after Princess Louise Caroline Alberta, fourth daughter of Queen
Victoria. Alberta has five national parks, including Banff National Park, established in 1885. The rugged
Badlands house some of the world’s richest deposits of prehistoric fossils and dinosaur finds. Alberta is
the largest producer of oil and gas, and the oil sands in the north are being developed as a major energy
source. Alberta is also renowned for agriculture, especially for the vast cattle ranches that make Canada
one of the world’s major beef producers. 

British Columbia is known for its majestic mountains and as Canada’s Pacific gateway. The Port of
Vancouver, Canada’s largest and busiest, handles billions of dollars in goods traded around the world.
Warm airstreams from the Pacific Ocean give the B.C. coast a temperate climate. 

British Columbia (B.C.), on the Pacific coast, is Canada’s westernmost province, with a population of
four million. The Port of Vancouver is our gateway to the Asia-Pacific. About one-half of all the goods
produced in B.C. are forestry products, including lumber, newsprint, and pulp and paper products—the
most valuable forestry industry in Canada. B.C. is also known for mining, fishing, and the fruit orchards
and wine industry of the Okanagan Valley. B.C. has the most extensive park system in Canada, with
approximately 600 provincial parks. The province’s large Asian communities have made Chinese and
Punjabi the most spoken languages in the cities after English. The capital, Victoria, is a tourist centre and
headquarters of the navy’s Pacific fleet. 

The Northwest Territories, Nunavut and Yukon contain one-third of Canada’s land mass but have a
population of only 100,000. There are gold, lead, copper, diamond and zinc mines. Oil and gas deposits
are being developed. The North is often referred to as the “Land of the Midnight Sun” because at the
height of summer, daylight can last up to 24 hours. In winter, the sun disappears and darkness sets in for
three months. The Northern territories have long cold winters and short cool summers. Much of the North
is made up of tundra, the vast rocky Arctic plain. Because of the cold Arctic climate, there are no trees
on the tundra and the soil is permanently frozen. Some continue to earn a living by hunting, fishing and
trapping. Inuit art is sold throughout Canada and around the world. 

Thousands of miners came to the Yukon during the Gold Rush of the 1890s, as celebrated in the poetry of
Robert W. Service. Mining remains a significant part of the economy. The White Pass and Yukon Railway
opened from Skagway in neighbouring Alaska to the territorial capital, Whitehorse, in 1900 and provides
a spectacular tourist excursion across precipitous passes and bridges. Yukon holds the record for the
coldest temperature ever recorded in Canada (-63°C). 
The Northwest Territories (N.W.T.) were originally made up in 1870 from Rupert’s Land and the NorthWestern Territory. 
The capital, Yellowknife (population 20,000), is called the “diamond capital of North
America.” More than half the population is Aboriginal (Dene, Inuit and Métis). The Mackenzie River, at
4,200 kilometres, is the second-longest river system in North America after the Mississippi and drains an
area of 1.8 million square kilometres. 

Nunavut, meaning “our land” in Inuktitut, was established in 1999 from the eastern part of the Northwest
Territories, including all of the former District of Keewatin. The capital is Iqaluit, formerly Frobisher Bay,
named after the English explorer Martin Frobisher, who penetrated the uncharted Arctic for Queen
Elizabeth I in 1576. The 19-member Legislative Assembly chooses a premier and ministers by consensus.
The population is about 85% Inuit, and Inuktitut is an official language and the first language in schools.
Nunavut. 

Canada’s vast North brings security and sovereignty challenges. Dealing with harsh weather conditions
in an isolated region, the Canadian Rangers, part of the Canadian Forces Reserves (militia), play a key
role. Drawing on indigenous knowledge and experience, the Rangers travel by snowmobile in the winter
and all-terrain vehicles in the summer from Resolute to the Magnetic North Pole, and keep the flag flying
in Canada’s Arctic. 
Course content directly sourced from Discover Canada - The Rights and Responsibilities of Citizenship
Found at: https://www.canada.ca/en/immigration-refugees-citizenship/corporate/publications-manuals/discover-canada.html
##
There are federal, provincial, territorial and municipal
governments in Canada. The responsibilities of the
federal and provincial governments were defined in
1867 in the British North America Act, now known as
the Constitution Act, 1867. 
In our federal state, the federal government
takes responsibility for matters of national and
international concern. These include defence,
foreign policy, interprovincial trade and
communications, currency, navigation, criminal
law and citizenship. The provinces are responsible
for municipal government, education, health,
natural resources, property and civil rights,
and highways. The federal government and the
provinces share jurisdiction over agriculture
and immigration. Federalism allows different
provinces to adopt policies tailored to their own
populations, and gives provinces the flexibility to
experiment with new ideas and policies. 
Every province has its own elected Legislative
Assembly, like the House of Commons in Ottawa.
The three northern territories, which have small
populations, do not have the status of provinces,
but their governments and assemblies carry out
many of the same functions. 

In Canada’s parliamentary democracy, the people
elect members to the House of Commons in Ottawa
and to the provincial and territorial legislatures.
These representatives are responsible for passing
laws, approving and monitoring expenditures,
and keeping the government accountable. 
Cabinet ministers are responsible to the elected
representatives, which means they must retain
the “confidence of the House” and have to resign
if they are defeated in a non-confidence vote. 
Parliament has three parts: the Sovereign (Queen
or King), the Senate and the House of Commons. 
Provincial legislatures comprise the Lieutenant
Governor and the elected Assembly. 
In the federal government, the Prime Minister
selects the Cabinet ministers and is responsible for
the operations and policy of the government. The
House of Commons is the representative chamber,
made up of members of Parliament elected by the
people, traditionally every four years. Senators are
appointed by the Governor General on the advice
of the Prime Minister and serve until age 75. Both
the House of Commons and the Senate consider
and review bills (proposals for new laws). No
bill can become law in Canada until it has been
passed by both chambers and has received royal
assent, granted by the Governor General on behalf
of the Sovereign. 

Living in a democracy, Canadian citizens have
the right and the responsibility to participate in
making decisions that affect them. It is important
for Canadians aged 18 or more to participate in
their democracy by voting in federal, provincial
or territorial and municipal elections. 

As a constitutional monarchy, Canada’s Head of
State is a hereditary Sovereign (Queen or King),
who reigns in accordance with the Constitution:
the rule of law. The Sovereign is a part of
Parliament, playing an important, non-partisan
role as the focus of citizenship and allegiance,
most visibly during royal visits to Canada. Her
Majesty is a symbol of Canadian sovereignty,
a guardian of constitutional freedoms, and a
reflection of our history. The Royal Family’s
example of lifelong service to the community is
an encouragement for citizens to give their best
to their country. As Head of the Commonwealth,
the Sovereign links Canada to 53 other nations
that cooperate to advance social, economic
and cultural progress. Other constitutional
monarchies include Denmark, Norway, Sweden,
Australia, New Zealand, The Netherlands, Spain,
Thailand, Japan, Jordan and Morocco. 
There is a clear distinction in Canada between
the head of state—the Sovereign—and the head
of government—the Prime Minister, who actually
directs the governing of the country. 
The Sovereign is represented in Canada by the
Governor General, who is appointed by the
Sovereign on the advice of the Prime Minister,
usually for five years. In each of the ten provinces,
the Sovereign is represented by the Lieutenant
Governor, who is appointed by the Governor
General on the advice of the Prime Minister, also
normally for five years. 
The interplay between the three branches
of government—the Executive, Legislative
and Judicial—which work together but also
sometimes in creative tension, helps to secure
the rights and freedoms of Canadians. 
Each provincial and territorial government has
an elected legislature where provincial and
territorial laws are passed. The members of the
legislature are called members of the Legislative
Assembly (MLAs), members of the National
Assembly (MNAs), members of the Provincial
Parliament (MPPs) or members of the House of
Assembly (MHAs), depending on the province or
territory. 
In each province, the Premier has a role similar
to that of the Prime Minister in the federal
government, just as the Lieutenant Governor has
a role similar to that of the Governor General.
In the three territories, the Commissioner
represents the federal government and plays a
ceremonial role. 

Under legislation passed by Parliament, federal
elections must be held on the third Monday in
October every four years following the most
recent general election. The Prime Minister
may ask the Governor General to call an earlier
election.
Canada is divided into 308 electoral districts, also
known as ridings or constituencies. An electoral
district is a geographical area represented by a
member of Parliament (MP). The citizens in each
electoral district elect one MP who sits in the
House of Commons to represent them, as well as
all Canadians.
Canadian citizens who are 18 years old or older
may run in a federal election. The people who
run for office are called candidates. There can be
many candidates in an electoral district.
The people in each electoral district vote for the
candidate and political party of their choice. The
candidate who receives the most votes becomes
the MP for that electoral district.

One of the privileges of Canadian citizenship
is the right to vote. You are eligible to vote in
a federal election or cast a ballot in a federal
referendum if you are:
a Canadian citizen; and
at least 18 years old on voting day; and
on the voters’ list.
The voters’ lists used during federal elections
and referendums are produced from the
National Register of Electors by a neutral agency
of Parliament called Elections Canada. This is
a permanent database of Canadian citizens 18
years of age or older who are qualified to vote in
federal elections and referendums.
Once an election has been called, Elections
Canada mails a voter information card to each
elector whose name is in the National Register
of Electors. The card lists when and where you
vote and the number to call if you require an
interpreter or other special services.
Even if you choose not to be listed in the National
Register of Electors or do not receive a voter
information card, you can still be added to the
voters’ list at any time, including on election day.
To vote either on election day or at advance polls,
go to the polling station listed on your voter
information card. (See voting procedures)

Canadian law secures the right to a secret ballot.
This means that no one can watch you vote and
no one should look at how you voted. You may
choose to discuss how you voted with others, but
no one, including family members, your employer
or union representative, has the right to insist
that you tell them how you voted. Immediately
after the polling stations close, election officers
count the ballots and the results are announced
on radio and television, and in the newspapers.
Ordinarily, after an election, the leader of the
political party with the most seats in the House
of Commons is invited by the Governor General
to form the government. After being appointed
by the Governor General, the leader of this party
becomes the Prime Minister. If the party in power
holds at least half of the seats in the House of
Commons, this is called a majority government.
If the party in power holds less than half of the
seats in the House of Commons, this is called a
minority government.
The Prime Minister and the party in power run
the government as long as they have the support
or confidence of the majority of the MPs. When
the House of Commons votes on a major issue
such as the budget, this is considered a matter
of confidence. If a majority of the members of
the House of Commons vote against a major
government decision, the party in power is
defeated, which usually results in the Prime
Minister asking the Governor General, on behalf
of the Sovereign, to call an election.
The Prime Minister chooses the ministers of the
Crown, most of them from among members of
the House of Commons. Cabinet ministers are
responsible for running the federal government
departments. The Prime Minister and the
Cabinet ministers are called the Cabinet and
they make important decisions about how the
country is governed. They prepare the budget
and propose most new laws. Their decisions can
be questioned by all members of the House of
Commons.
The other parties that are not in power are known
as opposition parties. The opposition party with
the most members of the House of Commons is
the Official Opposition or Her Majesty’s Loyal
Opposition. The role of opposition parties is to
peacefully oppose or try to improve government
proposals. There are three major political parties
currently represented in the House of Commons:
the Conservative Party, the New Democratic
Party, and the Liberal Party.

Voting procedures during an election perio
1. Voter information card
Electors whose information is in the National Register of Electors will receive a voter information card. This
confirms that your name is on the voters’ list and states when and where you vote.
32 Your Canadian Citizenship Study Guide
2. I did not get a card
If you do not receive a voter information card, call your local elections office to ensure that you are on the
voters’ list. If you do not have the number, call Elections Canada, in Ottawa, at 1-800-463-6868.
4. On election day
Go to your polling station. The location is on your voter information card. Bring this card and proof of your
identity and address to the polling station.
6. Voting is secret
Your vote is secret. You will be invited to go behind the screen to mark your ballot. Once marked, fold it
and present it to the poll officials.
3. Advance poll and special ballot
If you cannot or do not wish to vote on election day, you can vote at the advance polls or by special ballot.
The dates and location are on your voter information card.
5. Marking the ballot
Mark an “X” in the circle next to the name of the candidate of your choice.
7. The ballot box
The poll official will tear off the ballot number and give your ballot back to you to deposit in the ballot box.
8. The election results
When the polls close, every ballot is counted and the results are made public. You can see the results on
television or on the Elections Canada website (www.elections.ca).

Local or municipal government plays an
important role in the lives of our citizens.
Municipal governments usually have a council
that passes laws called “by-laws” that affect only
the local community. The council usually includes
a mayor (or a reeve) and councillors or aldermen.
Municipalities are normally responsible for
urban or regional planning, streets and roads,
sanitation (such as garbage removal), snow
removal, firefighting, ambulance and other
emergency services, recreation facilities, public
transit and some local health and social services.
Most major urban centres have municipal police
forces.
Provincial, territorial and municipal elections
are held by secret ballot, but the rules are not
the same as those for federal elections. It is
important to find out the rules for voting in
provincial, territorial and local elections so that
you can exercise your right to vote.

The First Nations have band chiefs and councillors
who have major responsibilities on First Nations
reserves, including housing, schools and other
services. There are a number of provincial,
regional and national Aboriginal organizations
that are a voice for First Nations, Métis and Inuit
people in their relationships with the federal,
provincial and territorial governments.


Course content directly sourced from Discover Canada - The Rights and Responsibilities of Citizenship
Found at: https://www.canada.ca/en/immigration-refugees-citizenship/corporate/publications-manuals/discover-canada.html
##
When Europeans explored Canada they found all
regions occupied by native peoples they called
Indians, because the first explorers thought they
had reached the East Indies. The native people
lived off the land, some by hunting and gathering,
others by raising crops. The Huron-Wendat of
the Great Lakes region, like the Iroquois, were
farmers and hunters. The Cree and Dene of the
Northwest were hunter-gatherers. The Sioux were
nomadic, following the bison (buffalo) herd. The
Inuit lived off Arctic wildlife. West Coast natives
preserved fish by drying and smoking. Warfare
was common among Aboriginal groups as they
competed for land, resources and prestige.

The arrival of European traders, missionaries,
soldiers and colonists changed the native way
of life forever. Large numbers of Aboriginals
died of European diseases to which they lacked
immunity. However, Aboriginals and Europeans
formed strong economic, religious and military
bonds in the first 200 years of coexistence which
laid the foundations of Canada.

The Vikings from Iceland who colonized
Greenland 1,000 years ago also reached Labrador
and the island of Newfoundland. The remains
of their settlement, l’Anse aux Meadows, are a
World Heritage site.

European exploration began in earnest in 1497
with the expedition of John Cabot, who was the
first to draw a map of Canada’s East Coast.

Between 1534 and 1542, Jacques Cartier made
three voyages across the Atlantic, claiming the
land for King Francis I of France. Cartier heard
two captured guides speak the Iroquoian word
kanata, meaning “village.” By the 1550s, the
name of Canada began appearing on maps.

In 1604, the first European settlement north of
Florida was established by French explorers
Pierre de Monts and Samuel de Champlain, first
on St. Croix Island (in present-day Maine), then at
Port-Royal, in Acadia (present-day Nova Scotia).
In 1608 Champlain built a fortress at what is now
Québec City. The colonists struggled against a
harsh climate. Champlain allied the colony with
the Algonquin, Montagnais and Huron, historic
enemies of the Iroquois, a confederation of five
(later six) First Nations who battled with the
French settlements for a century. The French and
the Iroquois made peace in 1701.

The French and Aboriginal people collaborated
in the vast fur-trade economy, driven by the
demand for beaver pelts in Europe. Outstanding
leaders like Jean Talon, Bishop Laval, and Count
Frontenac built a French Empire in North America
that reached from Hudson Bay to the Gulf of
Mexico.

In 1670, King Charles II of England granted the
Hudson’s Bay Company exclusive trading rights
over the watershed draining into Hudson Bay.
For the next 100 years the Company competed
with Montreal-based traders. The skilled and
courageous men who travelled by canoe were
called voyageurs and coureurs des bois, and
formed strong alliances with First Nations.

English colonies along the Atlantic seaboard,
dating from the early 1600s, eventually became
richer and more populous than New France. In
the 1700s France and Great Britain battled for
control of North America. In 1759, the British
defeated the French in the Battle of the Plains
of Abraham at Québec City marking the end
of France’s empire in America. The commanders
of both armies, Brigadier James Wolfe and the
Marquis de Montcalm, were killed leading their
troops in battle.

Following the war, Great Britain renamed the
colony the “Province of Quebec.” The French 
speaking Catholic people, known as habitants
or Canadiens, strove to preserve their way of life
in the English-speaking, Protestant-ruled British
Empire.

To better govern the French Roman Catholic
majority, the British Parliament passed the
Quebec Act of 1774. One of the constitutional
foundations of Canada, the Quebec Act
accommodated the principles of British
institutions to the reality of the province. It
allowed religious freedom for Catholics and
permitted them to hold public office, a practice
not then allowed in Britain. The Quebec Act
restored French civil law while maintaining
British criminal law

In 1776, the 13 British colonies to the south of
Quebec declared independence and formed the
United States. North America was again divided
by war. More than 40,000 people loyal to the
Crown, called “Loyalists,” fled the oppression
of the American Revolution to settle in Nova
Scotia and Quebec. Joseph Brant led thousands
of Loyalist Mohawk Indians into Canada. The
Loyalists came from Dutch, German, British,
Scandinavian, Aboriginal and other origins
and from Presbyterian, Anglican, Baptist,
Methodist, Jewish, Quaker and Catholic religious
backgrounds. About 3,000 black Loyalists,
freedmen and slaves came north seeking a better
life. In turn, in 1792, some black Nova Scotians,
who were given poor land, moved on to establish
Freetown, Sierra Leone (West Africa), a new
British colony for freed slaves.

Democratic institutions developed gradually and peacefully. The first representative assembly was
elected in Halifax, Nova Scotia, in 1758. Prince Edward Island followed in 1773, New Brunswick in 1785.
The Constitutional Act of 1791 divided the Province of Quebec into Upper Canada (later Ontario), which
was mainly Loyalist, Protestant and English-speaking, and Lower Canada (later Quebec), heavily Catholic
and French-speaking.

The Act also granted to the Canadas, for the first time, legislative assemblies elected by the people. The
name Canada also became official at this time and has been used ever since. The Atlantic colonies and
the two Canadas were known collectively as British North America.

Slavery has existed all over the world, from Asia,
Africa and the Middle East to the Americas. The
first movement to abolish the transatlantic slave
trade emerged in the British Parliament in the late
1700s. In 1793, Upper Canada, led by Lieutenant
Governor John Graves Simcoe, a Loyalist military
officer, became the first province in the Empire
to move toward abolition. In 1807, the British
Parliament prohibited the buying and selling of
slaves, and in 1833 abolished slavery throughout
the Empire. Thousands of slaves escaped from
the United States, followed “the North Star” and
settled in Canada via the Underground Railroad,
a Christian anti-slavery network.

The first companies in Canada were formed
during the French and British regimes and
competed for the fur trade. The Hudson’s Bay
Company, with French, British and Aboriginal
employees, came to dominate the trade in the
northwest from Fort Garry (Winnipeg) and Fort
Edmonton to Fort Langley (near Vancouver) and
Fort Victoria—trading posts that later became
cities.

The first financial institutions opened in the
late 18th and early 19th centuries. The Montreal
Stock Exchange opened in 1832. For centuries
Canada’s economy was based mainly on farming
and on exporting natural resources such as fur,
fish and timber, transported by roads, lakes,
rivers and canals.

After the defeat of Napoleon Bonaparte’s fleet in the Battle of Trafalgar (1805), the Royal Navy ruled the
waves. The British Empire, which included Canada, fought to resist Bonaparte’s bid to dominate Europe.
This led to American resentment at British interference with their shipping. Believing it would be easy to
conquer Canada, the United States launched an invasion in June 1812. The Americans were mistaken.
Canadian volunteers and First Nations, including Shawnee led by Chief Tecumseh, supported British
soldiers in Canada’s defence. In July, Major-General Sir Isaac Brock captured Detroit but was killed while
defending against an American attack at Queenston Heights, near Niagara Falls, a battle the Americans
lost. In 1813, Lieutenant-Colonel Charles de Salaberry and 460 soldiers, mostly French Canadiens,
turned back 4,000 American invaders at Chateauguay, south of Montreal. In 1813 the Americans
burned Government House and the Parliament Buildings in York (now Toronto). In retaliation in 1814,
Major-General Robert Ross led an expedition from Nova Scotia that burned down the White House and
other public buildings in Washington, D.C. Ross died in battle soon afterwards and was buried in Halifax
with full military honours.

By 1814, the American attempt to conquer Canada had failed. The British paid for a costly Canadian
defence system, including the Citadels at Halifax and Québec City, the naval drydock at Halifax and
Fort Henry at Kingston—today popular historic sites. The present-day Canada-U.S.A. border is partly an
outcome of the War of 1812, which ensured that Canada would remain independent of the United States. 

In the 1830s, reformers in Upper and Lower
Canada believed that progress toward full
democracy was too slow. Some believed Canada
should adopt American republican values or
even try to join the United States. When armed
rebellions occurred in 1837–38 in the area
outside Montreal and in Toronto, the rebels did
not have enough public support to succeed. They
were defeated by British troops and Canadian
volunteers. A number of rebels were hanged or
exiled; some exiles later returned to Canada.

Lord Durham, an English reformer sent to report
on the rebellions, recommended that Upper and
Lower Canada be merged and given responsible
government. This meant that the ministers of 
the Crown must have the support of a majority
of the elected representatives in order to govern.
Controversially, Lord Durham also said that
the quickest way for the Canadiens to achieve
progress was to assimilate into English-speaking
Protestant culture. This recommendation
demonstrated a complete lack of understanding
of French Canadians, who sought to uphold the
distinct identity of French Canada.

Some reformers, including Sir Étienne-Paschal
Taché and Sir George-Étienne Cartier, later
became Fathers of Confederation, as did a former
member of the voluntary government militia in
Upper Canada, Sir John A. Macdonald.

In 1840, Upper and Lower Canada were united
as the Province of Canada. Reformers such
as Sir Louis-Hippolyte La Fontaine and Robert
Baldwin, in parallel with Joseph Howe in Nova
Scotia, worked with British governors toward
responsible government.

The first British North American colony to attain
full responsible government was Nova Scotia
in 1847–48. In 1848–49 the governor of United
Canada, Lord Elgin, with encouragement from
London, introduced responsible government.

This is the system that we have today: if
the government loses a confidence vote in
the assembly it must resign. La Fontaine, a
champion of democracy and French language
rights, became the first leader of a responsible
government in the Canadas.

From 1864 to 1867, representatives of Nova
Scotia, New Brunswick and the Province of
Canada, with British support, worked together to
establish a new country. These men are known
as the Fathers of Confederation. They created two
levels of government: federal and provincial. The
old Province of Canada was split into two new
provinces: Ontario and Quebec, which, together
with New Brunswick and Nova Scotia, formed the
new country called the Dominion of Canada. Each
province would elect its own legislature and have
control of such areas as education and health.

The British Parliament passed the British North
America Act in 1867. The Dominion of Canada
was officially born on July 1, 1867. Until 1982,
July 1 was celebrated as “Dominion Day” to
commemorate the day that Canada became a
self-governing Dominion. Today it is officially
known as Canada Day.

Sir Leonard Tilley, an elected official and Father of Confederation from New Brunswick, suggested the term
Dominion of Canada in 1864. He was inspired by Psalm 72 in the Bible which refers to “dominion from sea
to sea and from the river to the ends of the earth.” This phrase embodied the vision of building a powerful,
united, wealthy and free country that spanned a continent. The title was written into the Constitution, was
used officially for about 100 years, and remains part of our heritage today.

When Canada took over the vast northwest region
from the Hudson’s Bay Company in 1869, the
12,000 Métis of the Red River were not consulted.
In response, Louis Riel led an armed uprising and
seized Fort Garry, the territorial capital. Canada’s
future was in jeopardy. How could the Dominion
reach from sea to sea if it could not control the
interior?

Ottawa sent soldiers to retake Fort Garry in
1870. Riel fled to the United States and Canada
established a new province: Manitoba. Riel was
elected to Parliament but never took his seat.
Later, as Métis and Indian rights were again
threatened by westward settlement, a second
rebellion in 1885 in present-day Saskatchewan
led to Riel’s trial and execution for high treason,
a decision that was strongly opposed in Quebec.
Riel is seen by many as a hero, a defender of
Métis rights and the father of Manitoba.

After the first Métis uprising, Prime Minister
Macdonald established the North West Mounted
Police (NWMP) in 1873 to pacify the West and
assist in negotiations with the Indians. The
NWMP founded Fort Calgary, Fort MacLeod and
other centres that today are cities and towns.
Regina became its headquarters. Today, the
Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP or “the
Mounties”) are the national police force and
one of Canada’s best-known symbols. Some of
Canada’s most colourful heroes, such as Major
General Sir Sam Steele, came from the ranks of
the Mounties.

British Columbia joined Canada in 1871 after Ottawa promised to build a railway to the West Coast. On
November 7, 1885, a powerful symbol of unity was completed when Donald Smith (Lord Strathcona), the
Scottish-born director of the Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR), drove the last spike. The project was financed
by British and American investors and built by both European and Chinese labour. Afterwards the Chinese
were subject to discrimination, including the Head Tax, a race-based entry fee. The Government of Canada
apologized in 2006 for this discriminatory policy. After many years of heroic work, the CPR’s “ribbons of
steel” fulfilled a national dream.

Canada’s economy grew and became more
industrialized during the economic boom of the
1890s and early 1900s. One million British and
one million Americans immigrated to Canada at
this time.

Sir Wilfrid Laurier became the first French
Canadian prime minister since Confederation
and encouraged immigration to the West. His
portrait is on the $5 bill. The railway made it
possible for immigrants, including 170,000
Ukrainians, 115,000 Poles and tens of thousands
from Germany, France, Norway and Sweden to
settle in the West before 1914 and develop a
thriving agricultural sector.

Most Canadians were proud to be part of the
British Empire. Over 7,000 volunteered to fight
in the South African War (1899–1902), popularly
known as the Boer War, and over 260 died. In
1900, Canadians took part in the battles of
Paardeberg (“Horse Mountain”) and Lillefontein,
victories that strengthened national pride in
Canada.

When Germany attacked Belgium and France in
1914 and Britain declared war, Ottawa formed the
Canadian Expeditionary Force (later the Canadian
Corps). More than 600,000 Canadians served in
the war, most of them volunteers, out of a total
population of eight million.

On the battlefield, the Canadians proved to be
tough, innovative soldiers. Canada shared in
the tragedy and triumph of the Western Front.
The Canadian Corps captured Vimy Ridge in
April 1917, with 10,000 killed or wounded,
securing the Canadians’ reputation for valour
as the “shock troops of the British Empire.” One
Canadian officer said: “It was Canada from the
Atlantic to the Pacific on parade ... In those few
minutes I witnessed the birth of a nation.” April 9
is celebrated as Vimy Day.

Regrettably, from 1914 to 1920, Ottawa interned
over 8,000 former Austro-Hungarian subjects,
mainly Ukrainian men, as “enemy aliens” in
24 labour camps across Canada, even though
Britain advised against the policy.

In 1918, under the command of General Sir Arthur
Currie, Canada’s greatest soldier, the Canadian
Corps advanced alongside the French and
British Empire troops in the last hundred days.
These included the victorious Battle of Amiens
on August 8, 1918–which the Germans called
“the black day of the German Army”–followed
by Arras, Canal du Nord, Cambrai and Mons.

With Germany and Austria’s surrender, the war
ended in the Armistice on November 11, 1918. In
total 60,000 Canadians were killed and 170,000
wounded. The war strengthened both national
and imperial pride, particularly in English
Canada.

At the time of Confederation, the vote was
limited to property-owning adult white males.
This was common in most democratic countries
at the time. The effort by women to achieve the
right to vote is known as the women’s suffrage
movement. Its founder in Canada was Dr. Emily
Stowe, the first Canadian woman to practise
medicine in Canada. In 1916, Manitoba became
the first province to grant voting rights to women.

In 1917, thanks to the leadership of women such
as Dr. Stowe and other suffragettes, the federal
government of Sir Robert Borden gave women
the right to vote in federal elections — first to
nurses at the battle front, then to women who
were related to men in active wartime service.
In 1918, most Canadian female citizens aged 21
and over were granted the right to vote in federal
elections. In 1921 Agnes Macphail, a farmer and
teacher, became the first woman MP. Due to the
work of Thérèse Casgrain and others, Quebec
granted women the vote in 1940.

Canadians remember the sacrifices of our
veterans and brave fallen in all wars up to the
present day in which Canadians took part,
each year on November 11: Remembrance Day.
Canadians wear the red poppy and observe a
moment of silence at the 11th hour of the 11th
day of the 11th month to honour the sacrifices
of over a million brave men and women who
have served, and the 110,000 who have given
their lives. Canadian medical officer Lieutenant
Colonel John McCrae composed the poem “In
Flanders Fields” in 1915; it is often recited on
Remembrance Day.

After the First World War, the British Empire
evolved into a free association of states known
as the British Commonwealth of Nations. Canada
remains a leading member of the Commonwealth
to this day, together with other successor states
of the Empire such as India, Australia, New
Zealand, and several African and Caribbean
countries.

The “Roaring Twenties” were boom times,
with prosperity for businesses and low
unemployment. The stock market crash of 1929,
however, led to the Great Depression or the “Dirty
Thirties.” Unemployment reached 27% in 1933
and many businesses were wiped out. Farmers
in Western Canada were hit hardest by low grain
prices and a terrible drought.

There was growing demand for the government to
create a social safety net with minimum wages,
a standard work week and programs such as
unemployment insurance. The Bank of Canada,
a central bank to manage the money supply
and bring stability to the financial system, was
created in 1934. Immigration dropped and many
refugees were turned away, including Jews trying
to flee Nazi Germany in 1939.

In order to defeat Nazism and Fascism, the Allies invaded Nazi-occupied Europe. Canadians took
part in the liberation of Italy in 1943–44. In the epic invasion of Normandy in northern France on
June 6, 1944, known as D-Day, 15,000 Canadian troops stormed and captured Juno Beach from the German
Army, a great national achievement shown in this painting by Orville Fisher. Approximately one in ten
Allied soldiers on D-Day was Canadian. The Canadian Army liberated the Netherlands in 1944–45 and
helped force the German surrender of May 8, 1945, bringing to an end six years of war in Europe.

The Second World War began in 1939 when Adolf
Hitler, the National Socialist (Nazi) dictator of
Germany, invaded Poland and conquered much
of Europe. Canada joined with its democratic
allies in the fight to defeat tyranny by force of
arms.

More than one million Canadians and
Newfoundlanders (Newfoundland was a separate
British entity) served in the Second World War,
out of a population of 11.5 million. This was a
high proportion and of these, 44,000 were killed.
The Canadians fought bravely and suffered
losses in the unsuccessful defence of Hong
Kong (1941) from attack by Imperial Japan, and
in a failed raid on Nazi-controlled Dieppe on the
coast of France (1942).

The Royal Canadian Air Force (RCAF) took part
in the Battle of Britain and provided a high
proportion of Commonwealth aircrew in bombers
and fighter planes over Europe. Moreover,
Canada contributed more to the Allied air effort
than any other Commonwealth country, with over
130,000 Allied air crew trained in Canada under
the British Commonwealth Air Training Plan.

The Royal Canadian Navy (RCN) saw its finest
hour in the Battle of the Atlantic, protecting
convoys of merchant ships against German
submarines. Canada’s Merchant Navy helped
to feed, clothe and resupply Britain. At the end
of the Second World War, Canada had the third
largest navy in the world.

In the Pacific war, Japan invaded the Aleutian
Islands, attacked a lighthouse on Vancouver
Island, launched fire balloons over B.C. and
the Prairies, and grossly maltreated Canadian
prisoners of war captured at Hong Kong. Japan
surrendered on August 14, 1945—the end of four
years of war in the Pacific.

Regrettably, the state of war and public opinion
in B.C. led to the forcible relocation of Canadians
of Japanese origin by the federal government and
the sale of their property without compensation.
This occurred even though the military and the
RCMP told Ottawa that they posed little danger to
Canada. The Government of Canada apologized
in 1988 for wartime wrongs and compensated the
victims.

Course content directly sourced from Discover Canada - The Rights and Responsibilities of Citizenship
Found at: https://www.canada.ca/en/immigration-refugees-citizenship/corporate/publications-manuals/discover-canada.html
##
Canadian citizens have rights and responsibilities. These come to us from our history, are secured by
Canadian law, and reflect our shared traditions, identity and values.
Canadian law has several sources, including laws passed by Parliament and the provincial legislatures,
English common law, the civil code of France and the unwritten constitution that we have inherited from
Great Britain.

Together, these secure for Canadians an 800-
year old tradition of ordered liberty, which dates
back to the signing of Magna Carta in 1215 in
England (also known as the Great Charter of
Freedoms), including:
Freedom of conscience and religion;
Freedom of thought, belief, opinion and
expression, including freedom of speech and
of the press;
Freedom of peaceful assembly; and
Freedom of association.
Habeas corpus, the right to challenge unlawful
detention by the state, comes from English
common law.
The Constitution of Canada was amended in
1982 to entrench the Canadian Charter of Rights
and Freedoms, which begins with the words,
“Whereas Canada is founded upon principles
that recognize the supremacy of God and the rule
of law.” This phrase underlines the importance of
religious traditions to Canadian society and the
dignity and worth of the human person.
The Charter attempts to summarize fundamental
freedoms while also setting out additional rights.
The most important of these include:
Mobility Rights — Canadians can live and
work anywhere they choose in Canada, enter
and leave the country freely, and apply for a
passport.
Aboriginal Peoples’ Rights — The rights
guaranteed in the Charter will not adversely
affect any treaty or other rights or freedoms of
Aboriginal peoples.
Official Language Rights and Minority
Language Educational Rights — French and
English have equal status in Parliament and
throughout the government.
Multiculturalism — A fundamental
characteristic of the Canadian heritage and
identity. Canadians celebrate the gift of one
another’s presence and work hard to respect
pluralism and live in harmony. 

In Canada, men and women are equal under the law. Canada’s openness and generosity do not extend
to barbaric cultural practices that tolerate spousal abuse, “honour killings,” female genital mutilation,
forced marriage or other gender-based violence. Those guilty of these crimes are severely punished under
Canada’s criminal laws.

In Canada, rights come with responsibilities.
These include:
Obeying the law — One of Canada’s founding
principles is the rule of law. Individuals and
governments are regulated by laws and not by
arbitrary actions. No person or group is above
the law.
Taking responsibility for oneself and one’s
family — Getting a job, taking care of one’s
family and working hard in keeping with one’s
abilities are important Canadian values. Work
contributes to personal dignity and selfrespect, and to Canada’s prosperity.
Serving on a jury — When called to do so, you
are legally required to serve. Serving on a jury is a
privilege that makes the justice system work as it
depends on impartial juries made up of citizens.
Voting in elections — The right to vote comes
with a responsibility to vote in federal,
provincial or territorial and local elections.
Helping others in the community — Millions
of volunteers freely donate their time to help
others without pay—helping people in need,
assisting at your child’s school, volunteering
at a food bank or other charity, or encouraging
newcomers to integrate. Volunteering is an
excellent way to gain useful skills and develop
friends and contacts.
Protecting and enjoying our heritage and
environment — Every citizen has a role to
play in avoiding waste and pollution while
protecting Canada’s natural, cultural and
architectural heritage for future generations.

The Canadian justice system guarantees everyone due process under the law. Our judicial system is
founded on the presumption of innocence in criminal matters, meaning everyone is innocent until proven
guilty.
Canada’s legal system is based on a heritage that includes the rule of law, freedom under the law,
democratic principles and due process. Due process is the principle that the government must respect all
the legal rights a person is entitled to under the law.

Canada is governed by an organized system of
laws. These laws are the written rules intended
to guide people in our society. They are made
by elected representatives. The courts settle
disputes and the police enforce the laws. The law
in Canada applies to everyone, including judges,
politicians and the police. Our laws are intended
to provide order in society and a peaceful way
to settle disputes, and to express the values and
beliefs of Canadians.

The Supreme Court of Canada is our country’s
highest court. The Federal Court of Canada deals
with matters concerning the federal government.
In most provinces there is an appeal court and
a trial court, sometimes called the Court of
Queen’s Bench or the Supreme Court. There are
also provincial courts for lesser offences, family
courts, traffic courts and small claims courts for
civil cases involving small sums of money.
Police

The police are there to keep people safe and to
enforce the law. You can ask the police for help
in all kinds of situations—if there’s been an
accident, if someone has stolen something from
you, if you are a victim of assault, if you see a
crime taking place or if someone you know has
gone missing.
There are different types of police in Canada.
There are provincial police forces in Ontario and
Quebec and municipal police departments in all
provinces. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police
(RCMP) enforce federal laws throughout Canada,
and serve as the provincial police in all provinces
and territories except Ontario and Quebec, as
well as in some municipalities. Remember, the
police are there to help you.
You can also question the police about their
service or conduct if you feel you need to. Almost
all police forces in Canada have a process by
which you can bring your concerns to the police
and seek action.

Lawyers can help you with legal problems and act
for you in court. If you cannot pay for a lawyer,
in most communities there are legal aid services
available free of charge or at a low cost.
Course content directly sourced from Discover Canada - The Rights and Responsibilities of Citizenship
Found at: https://www.canada.ca/en/immigration-refugees-citizenship/corporate/publications-manuals/discover-canada.html
##
The Canadian Crown
The Crown has been a symbol of the state
in Canada for 400 years. Canada has been a
constitutional monarchy in its own right since
Confederation in 1867 during Queen Victoria’s
reign. Queen Elizabeth II, who has been Queen
of Canada since 1952, marked her Golden Jubilee
in 2002, and celebrates her Diamond Jubilee
(60 years as Sovereign) in 2012. The Crown is a
symbol of government, including Parliament, the
legislatures, the courts, police services and the
Canadian Forces.
Flags in Canada;
A new Canadian flag was raised for the first time
in 1965. The red-white-red pattern comes from
the flag of the Royal Military College, Kingston,
founded in 1876. Red and white had been colours
of France and England since the Middle Ages and
the national colours of Canada since 1921. The
Union Jack is our official Royal Flag. The Canadian
Red Ensign served as the Canadian flag for about
100 years. The provinces and territories also have
flags that embody their distinct traditions.
The maple leaf;
The maple leaf is Canada’s best-known symbol.
Maple leaves were adopted as a symbol by
French Canadians in the 1700s, have appeared
on Canadian uniforms and insignia since the
1850s, and are carved into the headstones of our
fallen soldiers buried overseas and in Canada.
The fleur-de-lys;
It is said that the lily flower (“fleur-de-lys”) was
adopted by the French king in the year 496. It
became the symbol of French royalty for more than
1,000 years, including the colony of New France.
Revived at Confederation, the fleur-de-lys was
included in the Canadian Red Ensign. In 1948
Quebec adopted its own flag, based on the Cross
and the fleur-de-lys (see p. 47).
Coat of arms and motto;
As an expression of national pride after the First
World War, Canada adopted an official coat of
arms and a national motto, A mari usque ad
mare, which in Latin means “from sea to sea.”
The arms contain symbols of England, France,
Scotland and Ireland as well as red maple leaves.
Today the arms can be seen on dollar bills,
government documents and public buildings.
Parliament buildings;
The towers, arches, sculptures and stained glass
of the Parliament Buildings embody the French,
English and Aboriginal traditions and the Gothic
Revival architecture popular in the time of Queen
accidental fire in 1916 and rebuilt in 1922. The
Library is the only part of the original building
remaining. The Peace Tower was completed
in 1927 in memory of the First World War. The
Memorial Chamber within the Tower contains the
Books of Remembrance in which are written the
names of soldiers, sailors and airmen who died
serving Canada in wars or while on duty.
The provincial legislatures are architectural
treasures. The Quebec National Assembly is
built in the French Second Empire style, while the
legislatures of the other provinces are Baroque,
Romanesque and neoclassical, reflecting the
Greco-Roman heritage of Western civilization in
which democracy originated.
Popular sports
Hockey is Canada’s most popular spectator
sport and is considered to be the national winter
sport. Ice hockey was developed in Canada in
the 1800s. The National Hockey League plays
for the championship Stanley Cup, donated by
Lord Stanley, the Governor General, in 1892. The
Clarkson Cup, established in 2005 by Adrienne
Clarkson, the 26th Governor General (and the first
of Asian origin), is awarded for women’s hockey.
Many young Canadians play hockey at school, in
a hockey league or on quiet streets—road hockey
or street hockey—and are taken to the hockey
rink by their parents. Canadian children have
collected hockey cards for generations.
Canadian football is the second most popular
sport (see page 26). Curling, an ice game
introduced by Scottish pioneers, is popular.
Lacrosse, an ancient sport first played by
Aboriginals, is the official summer sport. Soccer
has the most registered players of any game in
Canada.
The beaver;
The beaver was adopted centuries ago as a
symbol of the Hudson’s Bay Company. It became
an emblem of the St. Jean Baptiste Society, a
French-Canadian patriotic association, in 1834,
and was also adopted by other groups. This
industrious rodent can be seen on the five-cent
coin, on the coats of arms of Saskatchewan
and Alberta, and of cities such as Montreal and
Toronto.
Canada’s official languages;
English and French are the two official languages
and are important symbols of identity. English
speakers (Anglophones) and French speakers
(Francophones) have lived together in
partnership and creative tension for more than
300 years. You must have adequate knowledge
of English or French to become a Canadian
citizen. Adult applicants 55 years of age or over
are exempted from this requirement.
Parliament passed the Official Languages Act in
1969. It has three main objectives:
Establish equality between French and English
in Parliament, the Government of Canada and
institutions subject to the Act;
Maintain and develop official language
minority communities in Canada; and
Promote equality of French and English in
Canadian society.

O Canada was proclaimed as the national anthem in 1980. It was first sung in Québec City in 1880. French
and English Canadians sing different words to the national anthem.

All countries have ways to recognize outstanding
citizens. Official awards are called honours,
consisting of orders, decorations and medals.
After using British honours for many years,
Canada started its own honours system with
the Order of Canada in 1967, the centennial of
Confederation.
If you know of fellow citizens who you think
are worthy of recognition, you are welcome to
nominate them. Information on nominations
for many of these honours can be found at
www.gg.ca/document.aspx?id=70?&lan=eng.

The Victoria Cross (V.C.) is the highest honour available to Canadians and is awarded for the most
conspicuous bravery, a daring or pre-eminent act of valour or self-sacrifice, or extreme devotion to duty in
the presence of the enemy. The V.C. has been awarded to 96 Canadians since 1854, including:
Then Lieutenant Alexander Roberts Dunn,
born in present-day Toronto, served in the
British Army in the Charge of the Light Brigade
at Balaclava (1854) in the Crimean War, and
was the first Canadian to be awarded the
Victoria Cross.
Able Seaman William Hall of Horton, Nova
Scotia, whose parents were American slaves,
was the first black man to be awarded the V.C.
for his role in the Siege of Lucknow during the
Indian Rebellion of 1857. 
Corporal Filip Konowal, born in Ukraine,
showed exceptional courage in the Battle of
Hill 70 in 1917, and became the first member
of the Canadian Corps not born in the British
Empire to be awarded the V.C.
Flying ace Captain Billy Bishop, born in Owen
Sound, Ontario, earned the V.C. in the Royal
Flying Corps during the First World War, and
was later an honorary Air Marshal of the Royal
Canadian Air Force.
Captain Paul Triquet of Cabano, Quebec,
earned the V.C. leading his men and a handful
of tanks in the attack on Casa Berardi in Italy
in 1943 during the Second World War, and
was later a Brigadier.
Lieutenant Robert Hampton Gray, a navy pilot
born in Trail, B.C., was killed while bombing
and sinking a Japanese warship in August
1945, a few days before the end of the Second
World War, and was the last Canadian to
receive the V.C. to date. 


