Which one of these describes Canada's economic formula?::International::Local::Service-based::Isolated::International!!
Which important economic group is Canada a part of?::World Bank::G8::Group 4::UEWS::G8!!
Which one of these is one of Canada's main 3 industries?::Tourism::Finance::Education::Manufacturing::Manufacturing!!
Who is Canada's most important trading partner?::United States of America::China::England::India::United States of America!!
Which agreement signed in 1994 allowed free trade between Canada, Mexico, and the United States::NAFTA::NARTA::AMCTA::UATC::NAFTA!!
Which main industry provides a majority of the jobs in Canada?::Service::Natural resources::Manufacturing::Education::Manufacturing!!
Which one of these is an important natural resource of Canada?::Gold::Glass::Cocoa::Fish::Fish!!
Which one of these is manufactured at a large scale by Canada?::Chocolate::Paper::Jewelry::Crude Oil::Paper!!
What is the USA-Canada border commonly known as?::The great divide::The line of Champlain::The longest undefended border in the world::The most undefended border in the world::The longest undefended border in the world!!
What is the short-form of the Canadian currency?::CAD::USD::CDA::GCP::CAD!!
What is Canada's economic system commonly known as?::Socialism::Mixed::Capitalism::Communism::Mixed!!
What portion of Canadian exports go to the USA?::About 1/3::About 2/3::About 1/2::About 3/4::About 3/4!!
##
Which continent is Canada in?::North America::USA::Africa::China::North America!!
Which one of these is NOT a region of Canada?::Central Canda::The Atlantic Provinces::The Southern Territories::The West Coast::The Southern Territories!!
What rank is Canada in terms of country size?::1st::2nd::3rd::4th::2nd!!
What is the capital city of Canada?::Ottawa::Quebec City::Vancouver::Toronto::Ottawa!!
Which queen chose the location of the capital?::Queen Elizabeth::Queen Harmon::Queen Victoria::Queen Ottawa::Queen Victoria!!
What is the capital of Alberta::Calgary?::Fort McMurray::Edmonton::Leduc::Edmonton!!
Which is the most eastward province?::Northwest Territories::Prince Edward Island::Nova Scotia::Newfoundland::Newfoundland!!
What is Newfoundland best known for?::Ocean resources::Grain::Cattle::Nuclear fuel::Ocean resources!!
Which one of these is not commonly used for power in Newfoundland?::Hydroelectricity::Solar Energy::Oil::Natural Gas::Solar Energy!!
Which is the smallest province?::Nova Scotia::Prince Edward Island?::Alberta::New Brunswick::Prince Edward Island!!
Where is Canada's largest naval base?::Ontario::New Brunswick::Newfoundland::Nova Scotia::Nova Scotia!!
Which province is officially bilingual?::Nova Scotia::New Brunswick::Ontario::Quebec::New Brunswick!!
Which province has the largest French presence?::New Brunswick::Ontario::Montreal::Quebec!!
What is the capital of Quebec::Montreal?::Quebec City::Ottawa::Quebec::Quebec City!!
Approximately what fraction of people live in Ontario?::1/2::1/4::2/7::1/3::1/3!!
Which province is the most important economically?::Alberta::Newfoundland::Ontario::Quebec::Ontario!!
Where is the most famous street intersection in Canada located?::Manitoba::Ontario::Quebec::Alberta!!
What is the most famous street intersection in Canada?::Portage and Main::109 and 42::Whyte and Blacke::Crown and 82::Portage and Main!!
How many national parks does Alberta have?::7::2::4::5::5!!
What is British Columbia's main industry?::Oil & Gas::Manufacturing::Forestry::Agriculture::Forestry!!
Which province has Chinese and Punjabi as its highest spoken languages after English?::Alberta::Ontario::Saskatchewan::British Columbia::British Columbia!!
Which province was populized during the gold rush of the 1890s?::Northwest Territories::Alberta::Yukon::British Columbia::Yukon!!
Which province is known for its diamonds?::Northwest Territories::Newfoundland::Alberta::Nunavut::Northwest Territories!!
Which province has the highest amount of Inuit people?::Northwest Territories::Ontario::Yukon::Nunavut!!
##
What does municipal government refer to?::Government of the country::Government of the province::Government of the city::Government of the county::Government of the city!!
What document defines the responsibilities of the government?::The Charter of Rights and Freedoms::The Magna Carta::The Constitution Act::The Imperial North America Act::The Constitution Act!!
Which of these are not responsibilities of the Federal government?::Communications::Currency::Healthcare::Defence::Healthcare!!
Which of these are not responsibilities of the Provincial government?::Natural resources::Property::Municipal government::Navigation::Navigation!!
Are there shared responsibilities between the Provincial and Federal government?::Yes::No::Maybe::so::Yes!!
Which of these entities specifically govern the province?::House of Commons::Member of Parliament::Legislative Assembly::City Council::Legislative Assembly!!
Who do you elect on a provincial level?::MLA::MP::Speaker of the House of Commons::Premier::MLA!!
Who do you elect on a federal level?::MLA::MP::President::Prime Minister::MP!!
Which of these is not part of the Parliament?::Sovereign::Senate::House of Commons::Prime Minister::Prime Minister!!
Who appoints the Senators?::The Prime Minister::The people::The Governor General::The Monarch::The Governor General!!
Who appoints the Governor General, and who do they represent?::The Prime Minister, The Monarch::The Monarch, The Prime Minister::The Monarch, The Monarch, The Prime Minister, The Prime Minister::The Monarch, The Monarch!!
What is the age of voting in Canada?::18::19::20::21::18!!
What elections can 18 year olds vote in?::Municipal::Provincial::Federal::All of them::All of them!!
How much authority does the Sovereign enjoy in Canada::None::They assent laws through the GG::They control the workings of the country::They control the foreign policy of the country::They assent laws through the GG!!
What is a difference between the government of Canada and the USA::The United States is a pure democrcy::Canada has more checks and balances in government::Canada is a constitutional democracy::Canada is a constitutional monarchy::Canada is a constitutional monarchy!!
Which of these is NOT a branch of the government of Canada?::Executive::Directorial::Legislative::Judicial::Directorial!!
Who is allegorical to the Prime Minister in the Provincial government?::The Mayor::The Provincial Minister::The Premier::The PLA::The Premier!!
What day do federal elections occur every four years?::The first Monday in January::The third Monday in October::The fourth Sunday in April::The first Friday in September::The third Monday in October!!
Can elections happen early::Yes::No::With the governor general's permission::With the Sovereign's permission::With the governor general's permission!!
Who represents an electoral district and is elected by constituents?::Member of Parliament::Member of the Leglislative Assembly::The Prime Minister::The Governor General::Member of Parliament!!
Which of these are not a necessary quality of a federal voter?::Canadian Citizen::18 years old::On the voter's list::No past criminal record::No past criminal record!!
What does Elections Canada mail all elligible voters?::A ballot::A brochure containing time & location of the poll::A voter information card::Nothing::A voter information card!!
Can you choose to not be listed on the National Register of Electors?::Yes::No::Only in cases of mental instability::Only if you are running for office::Yes!!
Can you willingly discuss your vote with others?::Yes::No::Only if you work in a government job::Only if you do not disclose the specific candidate::Yes!!
Can a party hold the Houes of Commons without having more than half the seats?::Yes::No::Only if they are still above 40%::Yes, but they are much more restricted in legislative power::Yes, but they are much more restricted in legislative power!!
Can a minority government pass legislation::Yes::No::Yes, but they most likely will have to co-operate with another party::No, but they can in the case of an emergency::Yes, but they most likely will have to co-operate with another party!!
Who do you call if you do not recieve a voter information card?::The Prime Minister::Your MP::Elections Canada::The Electoral Agency of Canada::Elections Canada!!
Where can you find information on advance polling or the special ballot?::Elections Canada::Your Voter Information Card::Email your MP::The Canadian Elections Website::Your Voter Information Card!!
Is the ballot number attached when the ballot is put in the box?::Yes::No::Depends on the polling station::There is no ballot number::No!!
Which level of Government passes by-laws?::Federal::Provincial::Municipal::Communal::Municipal!!
Which one of these is a municipal responsibility?::Postal service::Education::Garbage removal::Law creation::Garbage removal!!
Are the rules for municipal elections the same as the rules for federal elections?::Yes::No::In most cases::Yes, until recently::No!!
##
What did the settlers call the indigenous peoples of Canada?::Mik'maq::Siksika::Indians::Aboriginals::Indians!!
Was there warfare between inidgenous peoples before settlers arrived?::Yes::No::Yes, but they were very infrequent::No, but there were small skirmishes::Yes!!
Where did early Canadian settlers generally come from?::Europe::Africa::China::South America::Europe!!
Who were the first European contacts with Canada?::John Cabot::Jacques Cartier::The Vikings::Christopher Columbus::The Vikings!!
What did John Cabot do?::He found and mapped the Newfoundland area::He found a route to British Columbia::He died after voyaging to Africa::He traded furs with the indigenous::He found and mapped the Newfoundland area!!
What did Jacques Cartier do?::Claimed land for France and named Canada::Found large stocks of fish::Established a French colony called Quebec::Discovered Canada::Claimed land for France and named Canada!!
Who founded Quebec?::Jacques Cartier::Samuel Quebec::John Cabot::Samuel de Champlain::Samuel de Champlain!!
Which aboriginal community did Champlain NOT ally with?::Huron::Iroquois::Montagnais::Algonquin::Iroquois!!
Which animal was hunted heavily for its furs pre-Canada?::Moose::Beaver::Otter::Fox::Beaver!!
Which body of water was a large fur trading company named after?::James Bay::Thunder Bay::Hudsons Bay::Bay of Fundy::Hudsons Bay!!
Which battle marked the end of French control of North America::Battle of Hudsons Bay::Battle of the plains of Abraham::Battle of James Wolfe::Battle of Marquis de Montcalm::Battle of the Plains of Abraham!!
What were the French speaking people of Quebec known as after British control?::Canadians::Francophoneurs::Franconadiens::Canadiens::Canadiens!!
Which act was passed to assist the Quebecois after British control?::The Concordat::Proclamation Act::Quebec Act::British Quebec Reformation Act::Quebec Act!!
Which provinces did English Loyalists settle in during the American Revolution::Alberta & British Columbia::Nova Scotia and Quebec::Ontario and Quebec::Nova Scotia and Ontario::Nova Scotia and Quebec!!
Who were English Loyalists?::People who were loyal to the English during the American Revolution::People who were loyal to France during the AR::People who wanted to abolish slavery::People who wanted to perpetuate slavery::People who were loyal to the English during the American Revolution!!
Where was the first representative assembly elected?::Halifax::Ottawa::Quebec City::Toronto::Halifax!!
Did Canada ever house the slave trade?::Yes::No::Very early on, before European settlement::Only in the USA-CAN border cities::Yes!!
What time period did the British Parliament abolish slavery in Canada?::1500s::1600s::1700s::1800s::1800s!!
What did the first Canadian companies specialize in?::Fur trading::Oil & Gas::Lumber::Agriculture::Fur trading!!
What important American building was burnt by Canadians during the War of 1812::Fort Detroit::The White House::The United States Capitol::The Lincoln Memorial::The White House!!
Who invaded Canada during the war of 1812 and who won?::The Americans invaded and the Americans won::The Americans invaded and the Canadians won::The British invaded and the British won::The British invaded and the Canadians won::The Americans invaded and the Canadians won!!
What were the issues being rebelled over during the Rebellions of 1837-38?::The high taxes::The large American presence::The overly strict British laws::The slow integration of democracy::The slow integration of democracy!!
What report pushed for the merging of Upper and Lower Canada and pushed for responsible government?::The Montcalm Report::The McDonald Report::The Durham Report::The Streefer Report::The Durham Report!!
What was the first event that caused the Metis led by Louis Riel to rebel against the Canadian government?::The Aboriginal people were not consulted when Fort Edmonton was took::The Metis were not consulted when land previously controlled by the HBC was taken over::The high taxes for Metis::The taking of Manitoba::The Metis were not consulted when land previously controlled by the HBC was taken over!!
Why did British Columbia join Canada?::They were always part of Canada::It was taken in the Battle of the Columbian Plains::They promised to build a railway to the West Coast::They were promised a large sum of money::They promised to build a railway to the West Coast!!
Who is on the 5 dollar bill and why is he significant?::Wilfred Laurier, the first French-Canadian prime minister::Jacques Cartier, the first man to map out Canada::John A. MacDonald, The first prime minister of Canada::John Cabot, the man who discovered Canada::Wilfred Laurier, the first French-Canadian prime minister!!
Why was there such a large volume of Ukranian, German, French, Norwegian, and Swedish immigrants in the early 1900s::The invention of the automobile::The invention of the railcar::The creation of the Canadian Pacific Railway::Widespread war in Europe::The creation of the Canadian Pacific Railway!!
Why were the Canadian troops known as the "Shock troops of the British Empire"?::They proved themselves to be tough, innovative soldiers::They lost many battles::There were few of them, and they arrived sporadically::They excusively used surprise tactics::They proved themselves to be tough, innovative soldiers!!
How impactful were Canadian troops during the First World War?::They had very little impact::They had no impact::They were the most important troops::They had a large impact::They had a large impact!!
Which war contributed most to Canadian national pride?::The War of 1812::The 7 Years war::The Second World War::The First World War::The First World War!!
Which was the first province to grant voting rights to women?::Newfoundland::British Columbia::Manitoba::Saskatchewan::Manitoba!!
Which year were all women granted the vote in Canada?::1920::1930::1940::1950::1940!!
Which poem is most commonly associated with Remembrance day and the sacrifices of WWI::Dulce et Decorum est::The Soldier::MCMXIV::In Flanders Fields::In Flanders Fields!!
Which event led to the "Dirty Thirties" that caused unemployment to reach 27%?::The Second World War::The Stock Market Crash of 1929::The Blight of 1931::The American invasion of 1930::The Stock Market Crash of 1929!!
What were two descriptors of 1930s Canada?::Lack of immigration and economic stagnation::Large amounts of immigration and economic boom::Large-scale warfare and economic prosperity::Universal suffrage and large-scale immigration::Lack of immigration and economic stagnation!!
How did Canada recieve Jews fleeing from Nazi Germany in 1939::They were very selective::They allowed all of them::They disallowed them::Canada never recieved any Jewish refugees::They disallowed them!!
Did Canadians participate in the D-Day invasion?::Yes, but only Canadian immigrants in America::No::Yes::No, but there were some Americans with half-Canadian ancestry::Yes!!
What was the most impressive action taken by the Royal Canadian Navy in WWII?::The invasion of German Harbord::The defence of convoys of merchant ships against German submarines::The resupplying of British Forts::The defence of Mor Ardain::The defence of convoys of merchant ships against German submarines!!
What was done to Japanese Canadians after WWII?::Genocide::Recompensation::Forcible relocation::Nothing::Forcible relocation!!
What was issued to Japanese Canadians in 1988 after their unfair expulsion following the events of the Second World War?::Nothing::Financial recompensation::An apology::Land recompensation::An apology!!
##
What is presumed under Canadian Law?::Innocence until proven guilty::Guilty until proof of innocence::Guilty::Innocence until guilt can be assumed::Innocence until proven guilty!!
What is guarunteed under Canadian Law?::Guilt::Innocence::Due process::Settlement::Due process!!
Who makes laws?::Appointed officials::The people::The Prime Minister::Elected representatives::Elected representatives!!
Is there anyone exempt to Canadian laws?::Not officially::Yes::No::Legal officials::No!!
What is the highest court in Canada?::The Federal Court of Canada::The Supreme Court of Canada::The Supreme Court::The Queen's Bench::The Supreme Court of Canada!!
Who enforces federal law in Canada?::The Federal Police of Canada::The People's Police of Canada::The Royal Canadian Mountain Police::The Royal Canadian Mounted Police::The Royal Canadian Mounted Police!!
Does every province have a provincial police department?::Yes::No::Maybe::So::No!!
Are you allowed to personally contact police?::Yes::No::Only over the phone::Only in an immediate emergency::Yes!!
What is the lower-end of the hourly rate needed for a lawyer?::$350::$165::$225::There are organizations where lawyers defend clients in need free or of very low charge::There are organizations where lawyers defend clients in need free of charge!!
What court is used for provincial appeals?::The King's Bench::The Queen's Bench::The Supreme Court of Alberta::The Court of Appeals::The Queen's Bench!!
Which government handles civil courts::Provincial::Municipal::Communal::Federal::Provincial!!
Which provinces have provincial police forces?::Ontario and Alberta::Manitoba and Quebec::British Columbia and Ontario::Ontario and Quebec::Ontario and Quebec!!
Can you question the police on their service or conduct?::Yes::No::Maybe::so::Yes!!
##
Which of these is a symbol of the Canadian State?::The Mace::The Fleur-De-Lys::The Crown::The Maple Leaf::The Crown!!
How long has the crown been a symbol of the state in Canada?::200 years::300 years::400 years::500 years::400 years!!
When was the maple leaf flag first flown?::1965::1867::1904::1868::1965!!
What is the official Royal Flag of Canada?::The Maple Leaf::The Coat of Arms::The Fleur-De-Lys::The Union Jack::The Union Jack!!
What is carved into the headstones of fallen Canadian soldiers?::Their ranks::The Maple Leaf::The Coat of Arms::Nothing::The Maple Leaf!!
Which of these is not a symbol of French Canadians?::The Union Jack::The Maple Leaf::The Lilly Flower::The Cross::The Union Jack!!
What is Canada's motto in English::"The True North Strong and Free"::"French and English Unity"::From sea to sea::From ocean to ocean::From sea to sea!!
Which country is not represented in Canada's Coat of arms::England::France::Wales::Scotland::Wales!!
What is the most popular sport in Canada?::Basketball::Football::Ice Hockey::Baseball::Ice Hockey!!
What is the official summer sport of Canada::Canadian Football::Lacrosse::Floor Hockey::There is no official summer sport::Lacrosse!!
What is the animal symbol of the Hudson's Bay Company?::Moose::Goose::Muskrat::Beaver::Beaver!!
Do you need to know adequate amounts of English or French to become a Canadian citizen?::English::French::Both::Either::Either!!
What act protects the two official languages of Canada::The Official Languages Act::The Bilingual Country Act::The AngloFranco Canada Act::There is no act that protects both languages::The Official Languages Act!!
Does Canada have a Royal & National Anthem::No, only National::No, only Royal::Yes::Neither::Yes!!
What award does Canada give out to outstanding Citizens?::The Medal of Canada::The Medal of Honour::The Order of Honour::The Order of Canada::The Order of Canada!!
What is the most prestigious military award in Canada?::The Purple Cross::The Victoria Cross::The Purple Heart::The Purple Cross::The Victoria Cross!!